THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md, before:

Third-Party Notices

This product includes software developed by third parties. The following copyright, license, and NOTICE information is provided to satisfy attribution requirements for redistribution.

How this file is maintained
- Generated in CI for every push/PR. Artifacts include a JSON inventory (`licenses.json`) and this Markdown file with embedded license texts when available.
- To regenerate locally (requires `uv`):
  1. uv sync --all-groups --locked
  2. uvx pip-licenses --format=markdown --with-license-file --with-authors --with-urls > THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md
  3. uvx pip-licenses --format=json --with-license-file --with-authors --with-urls > licenses.json

Notes on obligations
- Many permissive licenses (MIT, BSD, ISC, Apache-2.0) require preserving copyright and license text; Apache-2.0 may also include a NOTICE file whose contents must be carried forward.
- If any dependency uses attribution-required content (e.g., CC-BY) or copyleft licenses (GPL family), additional obligations may apply.

Dependency attributions

This section is generated by CI and may be truncated in the repository copy. Refer to the CI artifact for the full, up-to-date list.

---

<generated-by-ci>

Commit message:

Move license compliance from CI to local Makefile targets
Co-authored-by: kevin <kevin@giskard.ai>

THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md, after:

Third-Party Notices

This product includes software developed by third parties. The following copyright, license, and NOTICE information is provided to satisfy attribution requirements for redistribution.

How this file is maintained
- Regenerate locally using Makefile targets:
  - make licenses       # generates licenses.json and THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md
  - make licenses-check # fails if disallowed licenses are detected
  - make install-tools  # installs pip-licenses and other tools via uv

Notes on obligations
- Many permissive licenses (MIT, BSD, ISC, Apache-2.0) require preserving copyright and license text; Apache-2.0 may also include a NOTICE file whose contents must be carried forward.
- If any dependency uses attribution-required content (e.g., CC-BY) or copyleft licenses (GPL family), additional obligations may apply.

Dependency attributions

This section is generated by `make licenses` and may be truncated in the repository copy. Refer to your local generation or release artifacts for the full, up-to-date list.

---

<generated-by-ci>
